# SDImpute
A R package.
## SDImpute: A statistical block imputation method based on cell-level and gene-level information for dropouts in single-cell RNA-seq data

## Introduction
SDImpute is an implement block imputation for dropout events in scRNA-seq data. SDImpute combines both cell-level and gene-level information to identify the drop-out events and borrows the information unaffected by dropouts from similar cells to impute the dropouts.

## Installation
You can install SDImpute from GitHub with:

``` r
install.packages("devtools")         
library(devtools)           
install_github("Jinsl-lab/SDImpute")
```

## Quick start
The input data of SDImpute is a gene expression matrix, columns and rows represent cells and genes respectively. You can choose whether or not to preprocess the data.

``` r
library(SDImpute)
# An example scRNA-seq dataset, containing 10,166 genes and 425 cells.
data(data)
imputed_data<-SDImpute(data,do.nor=TRUE,do.log=FALSE,auto.k=FALSE,k=5,M=15,T=0.5)
% Generated by roxygen2: do not edit by hand
% Please edit documentation in R/SDImpute.r
\name{SDImpute}
\alias{SDImpute}
\title{SDImpute: A statistical block imputation method based on cell-level and gene-level information for dropouts
in single-cell RNA-seq data}
\usage{
SDImpute(
  data,
  do.nor = TRUE,
  auto.k = TRUE,
  criterion = "asw",
  krange = c(5:15),
  k = 5,
  M = 15,
  T = 0.5
)
}
\arguments{
\item{data}{A gene expression matrix,the rows correspond to genes and the columns correspond to cells.}

\item{do.nor}{Logical. If TRUE, the data is Normalized.}

\item{auto.k}{Logical. If TRUE, k is estimated  by either the Calinski Harabasz index  or average silhouette width ;
If FALSE, the parameter k need to be set manually.}

\item{criterion}{One of "asw" or "ch". Determines whether average silhouette width or Calinski-Harabasz is applied.}

\item{krange}{Integer vector. Numbers of clusters which are to be compared by the average
silhouette width criterion. Note: average silhouette width and Calinski-Harabasz
can't estimate number of clusters nc=1.}

\item{k}{Integer. The number of cell clusters. This parameter can be determined based on prior knowledge or clustering result of raw data.}

\item{M}{Integer. The number of nearest neighbors.When the number of nearest neighbors for each cell is small, the parameter M should not
be too large to guarantee that it makes sense. In general, this parameter is set to an integer between 10 and 30.}

\item{T}{Numeric between 0 and 1. The dropout probability candidate threshold which controls the degree of imputation to the gene expression
matrix. The recommended value of parameter T is 0.5.}
}
\value{
An imputation matrix
}
\description{
SDImpute: A statistical block imputation method based on cell-level and gene-level information for dropouts
in single-cell RNA-seq data
}
\examples{
library("SDImpute")
data(data)
imputed_data<-SDImpute(data,do.nor=TRUE,auto.k=FALSE,k=5,M=15,T=0.5)
}
\name{data}
\alias{data}
\docType{data}
\title{Camp dataset}
\description{
  This data set is subset from Camp et al. (2017). Original data is

  RNA-seq data on 425 cells.Column names indicate five different cell types,
  row names indicate gene.

}
\examples{
library("SDImpute")
data(data)
imputed_data<-SDImpute(data,do.nor=TRUE,auto.k=FALSE,k=5,M=15,T=0.5)
}

